An alternative situation that is often studied with scRNA-seq is development. Instead of having groups of mature cells, individual cells are somewhere on a continuous differentiation path from one cell type to another. To model this the Splat simulation uses the differential expression process described previously to define expression levels in a start and end cell for each path. An interpolation process is then used to define multiple steps between the two cells types and the simulated cells are randomly assigned to one of these steps, which defines the mean expression for the genes in that cell. As well as the differential expression parameters that define how different the end points of each path are, Splat has parameters for the length of a path (the number of steps) and how the path is skewed (whether cells are more likely to have come from the start or end of the path).

In real data it has been observed that expression of genes can change in non-linear ways across a differentiation trajectory. For example, a gene may be lowly expressed at the beginning of a process, highly expressed in the middle and lowly expressed at the end. We model these kinds of changes by generating a Brownian bridge (a random walk with fixed end points) between the two end cells which is then smoothed and interpolated. This random element allows any pattern of expression changes over a path. As with the other parts of the Splat simulation the non-linear changes in expression can be controlled via parameters that define the probability that a gene changes in a non-linear way and the variability around the steps in the random walk. A further way to simulate complex changes is to have more complex differentiation paths. These paths may have multiple steps or branches, for example you may wish to simulate a stem-cell that differentiates into an intermediate cell type which then changes into one of two mature cell types. These possibilities are enabled by allowing the user to set the starting point of each path. Figure \ref{fig:complex} shows examples of the Splat simulation with both groups and paths.