Comparison of different simulation methods as returned by Splatter's comparison function. The Tung dataset (orange) is the real data on which the simulations were based. Panel A shows the distribution of mean expression as a violin plot with the lower quartile, median and upper quartile marked as lines. We see that the Splat and Simple simulations are skewed towards lowly expressed genes while the Lun 2 simulation which samples means from the original data best matches the real dataset. Panel B shows a similar plot of gene variances with the Lun 2 simulation having some extremely variable genes. Panel C shows the relationship between mean and variance. The Simple and Splat simulations are good matches to the real data while the two Lun simulations are too variable relative to the mean. The scDD simulation shows an unusual patters which does not match the trend seen in the Tung data. In panel D we see a boxplot of library size. The two simulations (Splat and Lun 2) which explicitly include this in their model are good matches to the real data. The Simple simulation is similar to the real data but does not display any variability. The Lun simulation has too few counts per cell and the scDD simulation too many. The remaining two panels show the percentage of zeros in each gene (E) or cell (F). All of the simulations show too many zeros in both cases, with the exception of the scDD simulation which has too few. These plots demonstrate that no one simulation best matches the real dataset across all measures.