**Datasets**

Each of the datasets used in the comparison of simulations is publicly available. Raw FASTQ files for the Camp dataset were download from SRA (Accession SRP066834) and processed using a Bpipe (v0.9.9.3) pipeline that examined the quality of reads using FastQC (v0.11.4), aligned the reads to the hg38 reference genome using STAR (v2.5.2a) and counted reads overlapping genes in the Gencode V22 annotation using featureCounts (v1.5.0-p3). Matrices of expression values for the Klein (Accession GSM1599500) and Zeisel (Accession GSE60361) datasets were download from GEO. For the Tung dataset the matrix of molecules aligned to each gene available from https://github.com/jdblischak/singleCellSeq was used. This data is also available from GEO (Accession GSE77288). The Salmon quantification files for the Engel dataset were download from the Conquer database (http://imlspenticton.uzh.ch:3838/conquer/) and converted to a gene by cell matrix using the tximport package.

**Simulation comparison**

For each dataset the data file was read into R and converted to a gene by cell matrix. Any genes that had zero expression in all cells or any missing values were filtered out and 200 cells were randomly selected without replacement. The parameters for each simulation were estimated from the selected cells and a synthetic dataset generated with 200 cells and the same number of genes as the real data. For the Splat and Lun 2 simulations both the regular and zero-inflated variants were used to simulate data. The resulting seven simulations were then compared to the real data using Splatter's comparison functions and plots showing the overall comparison produced. In order to compare simulations across the datasets summary statistics were calculated. For each of the basic metrics (mean, variance, library size, zeros per gene and zeros per cell) the genes were sorted individually for each simulation and the difference from the sorted values in the real data calculated. When looking at the relationship between mean expression level and other metrics (variance, zeros per gene) genes in both the real and simulated data were sorted by mean expression and the difference between the other metric of interest (eg. variance) calculated. The Median Absolute Deviation for each metric was then calculated and ranked for dataset to give the rankings shown in Figure \ref{fig:comparison}.

**Clustering evaluation**
