Existing scRNA-seq analysis packages, and any new methods that are being developed, should be able to demonstrate two things: 1) they can do what they claim to do, whether that is clustering, lineage tracing, differential expression testing or improved performance compared to other methods and 2) that they produce some meaningful biological insight. The second criterion is specific to particular studies but it should be possible to address to the first point in a more general way. A common way to test the performance of an analysis method is through a simulation. Simulated data provides a known truth to test against, making it possible to see whether a method has been implemented correctly and whether the assumptions of the method are appropriate, while demonstrating it's limitations. This is difficult with real biological data where an experiment must be specifically designed or results from an orthogonal test taken as the truth. Simulations, however, allow access to a range of metrics for assessing the performance of an analysis method. An additional advantage of assessing performance on simulated data is that many datasets, with different parameters and assumptions, can be rapidly generated at minimal cost. As such, many of the scRNA-seq analysis packages that are currently available use simulations to demonstrate their effectiveness. These simulations, however, are often not described in a reproducible or reusable way and the code to construct them may not be readily available. When code is available it is often poorly documented or written specifically for the computing environment of the authors. Most importantly publications do not usually devote time to demonstrating that a simulation is similar to real datasets, or how it differs.