Splatter is designed to provide a consistent interface to multiple models for simulating scRNA-seq expression data. Currently Splatter implements five different simulation models, each with their own assumptions, which are described in more detail in the following sections. The Splatter simulation process consists of two steps. The first step takes a real dataset and estimates the parameters required for the simulation. The result of the first step is a parameters object unique to each simulation model. These objects have been designed to hold the information required for the simulation and display to the user details such as which parameters can be estimated and which have been changed from the default value. It is important that each simulation has it's own object for storing parameters as different simulations can vary greatly in the information they require, for example some simulations only need parameters for well known statistical distributions while others require large vectors or matrices of data sampled from real datasets.

In the second step Splatter takes the estimated parameters, along with any additional parameters that cannot be estimated or are specified by the user, and generates a synthetic scRNA-seq dataset. In the case that there is no relevant real data to estimate paramters from, a synthetic dataset can still be generated using default parameters that can be manually modified by the user. The main result of the simulation step is a matrix of counts which is returned as an SCESet object from the scater package \cite{McCarthy_2016}. The structure of this object is described in detail in the scater package documentation and the accompanying paper but briefly it combines cell by feature (gene) matrices for storing expression values with tables for storing metadata about cells and features. This format makes it convenient to return intermediate values created during simulation as well as the final expression matrix. For example, the underlying gene means in different groups of cells are returned and could be used as a truth when evaluating differential expression testing. The documentation for each simulation describes the model, the parameters it uses and the intermediate values it returns.

An additional feature of Splatter is the ability to compare SCESet objects. These may be simulations with different parameters or different models but can also be real datasets from which parameters have been estimated. The comparison function takes one or more SCESet objects, combines them (keeping any metadata that is present in all of them) and produces a series of diagnostic plots that compare aspects of scRNA-seq data. The combined datasets are also returned making it easy for the user to produce any additional comparison plots or statistics. Alternatively one SCESet can be specified as a reference and the difference between this and the other datasets can be plotted, an approach that is particularly useful for comparing simulations. An example of these comparison plots is shown in Figure \ref{fig:comparison}.