The Splat simulation model is based around a gamma-Poisson distribution where the mean expression level for each gene ($\lambda^{'}_i$) is simulated from a gamma distribution with a given shape ($\alpha$) and rate ($\beta$) and the count for each cell comes from a Poisson distribution. While the gamma distribution is a good fit for gene means it does not always capture extreme expression levels. To counter this we allow the user to specify a probability ($\pi^{O}$) that a gene is an expression outlier and the probability (\pi^{LO}$) that these outlier genes are lowly expressed. We then add these outliers to the simulation but replacing the previously simulated mean with the median mean expression level multiplied by a factor taken from a log-normal distribution with location $\mu^{O}$ and scale $\sigma^{O}$.

The library size (total number of counts) for cells in an scRNA-seq can vary within an experiment and be very different between experiments depending on the sequencing depth. We model library size using a log-normal distribution (with location $\mu^{L}$ and scale $\sigma^{L}$) and use the simulated expected library sizes ($L_j$) to proportionally adjust the gene means for each cell. This allows us to alter the number of counts per a cell independently of the underlying gene expression levels. There is a known relationship in RNA-seq data between the mean expression of a gene and it's variance. In the Splat simulation we enforce this trend by simulating a Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV). The BCV ($B_{i,j}$) has an underlying dispersion ($\phi$) adjusted by the simulated gene means with a random element drawn from an inverse chi-squared distribution with $df$ degrees of freedom. After simulating the BCV values we generate a new set of means ($\lambda_{i,j}$) from a Gamma distribution with shape and rate parameters based on BCV values and the previous means. These means are then used as the lambda parameter to generate a matrix of counts ($Y^{'}_{i,j}$) from a Poisson distribution. This process is similar to that used by Law et al. in their simulation of RNA-seq data \cite{Law_2014}.

As discussed previously one of the key features of scRNA-seq data is the high proportion of zeros, one cause of which is technical dropout. We use the relationship between the mean expression of a gene and the proportion of zeros in that gene to model this process by using a logistic function to produce a probability that a count should be zero. These probabilities are then using to randomly replace the simulated counts with zeros. As with the other parts of the Splat simulation this step is easily controlled by the user and can be turned off when it is not desirable or appropriate. The final results is a matrix of observed counts $Y_{i,j}$ where the rows are genes and the columns are cells. The full set of input parameters are shown in Table \ref{tab:params} and the intermediate values and the equations used to produce them in Table \ref{tab:intermediate}.