The Tung dataset (orange) is the real data on which the simulations were based. Looking across the metrics in Figure 1 it is clear that no simulation performs perfectly on all metrics. We see that the Simple simulation is skewed towards lowly expressed genes while both the Lun 2 simulation, which samples means from the original data, and the Splat simulation match the real dataset (Figure 1A). However the Lun 2 simulation has some extremely variable genes (Figure 1B). Figure 1C shows the relationship between mean and variance. The Simple and Splat simulations are good matches to the real data while the two Lun simulations are too variable relative to the mean. The scDD simulation shows an unusual pattern which does not match the trend seen in the Tung data. Figure 1D shows boxplots of library size. The two simulations (Splat and Lun 2) which explicitly include this in their model are good matches to the real data. The Simple simulation is similar to the real data but does not display any variability while the Lun simulation has too few counts per cell and the scDD simulation too many. The next two panels show the percentage of zeros in each gene (E) or cell (F). With the exception of the scDD simulation which has too few, all of the simulations show too many zeros in both cases, although this is minimised in the Splat simulation. This property is also demonstrated when comparing the mean expression of a gene to the percentage of zeros (G), with most simulations having excess dropout relative to the mean. These plots demonstrate that no one simulation best matches the real dataset across all measures, however some perform better than others with the Splat and Lun 2 simulations being the best matches in this example.