To make it easy for the user to generate a simulation that is similar to a given dataset we provide functions to estimate many of the parameters of the Splat model. The parameters that control the mean expression of each gene (\(\alpha\) and \(\beta\)) are estimate by fitting a gamma distribution to the means of the library size normalised counts using the fitdistrplus package \cite{Delignette_Muller_2015}. This is a basic normalisation where the counts in the original dataset are adjusted so that each has the same number of total counts (in this case the median across all cells) and any genes that are all zero are removed. Parameters for the library size distribution (\(\mu^{L}\) and \(\sigma^{L}\)) are estimated in a similar way by fitting a log-normal distribution to the unnormalised library sizes. The procedure for estimating expression outlier parameters is more complex. Taking the library size normalised counts, outliers are defined as genes where the mean expression is more than two Median Absolute Deviations (MADs) from the median mean gene expression level. The outlier probability \(\pi^{O}\) is calculated as the proportion of genes that are outliers and the lowly expressed probability \(\pi^{LO}\) is the proportion of outliers that have expression below the median. Parameters for the outlier factors (\(\mu^{O}\) and \(\sigma^{O}\)) are estimated by fitting a log-normal distribution to the ratio of the means of the outlier genes to the median mean gene expression level. BCV parameters are estimated using the estimateDispersion funciton in the edgeR package \cite{Robinson_2009}. Dropout is estimated by fitting a logistic function to the relationship between the log means of the normalised counts and the proportion of samples that are zero for each gene. Dropout is determined to be present if more that ten percent of genes have more observed zeros than what would be expected from a negative-binomial distribution with the given mean. 